>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SATURDAY, MARCH 14: IN
MADISON, WISCONSIN, THE FUNERAL
FOR AN UNARMED TEEN SHOT AND
KILLED BY POLICE; IN FERGUSON,
MISSOURI, ONGOING TENSIONS AND
THE MANHUNT AFTER THE SHOOTING
OF TWO POLICE OFFICERS; ALSO,
IRAN'S INFLUENCE IN IRAQ'S
BATTLE AGAINST ISIS; AND IN OUR
SIGNATURE SEGMENT, PLANNING FOR
THE INEVITABLE BY PROTECTING
YOUR ONLINE ACCOUNTS.
>> THE YEAR AFTER SOMEBODY
PASSES IS ONE OF THE MOST
VULNERABLE TIMES FOR IDENTITY
THEFT.
>> Sreenivasan: NEXT ON PBS
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS IN
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
TWO CITIES ARE GRAPPLING WITH
VIOLENCE AND RACIAL TENSION
TONIGHT.
IN MADISON, WISCONSIN, HUNDREDS
OF MOURNERS ARE EXPECTED TO
ATTEND THE VISITATION AND
FUNERAL THIS EVENING FOR 19-
YEAR-OLD TONY ROBINSON.
HE'S THE BIRACIAL UNARMED TEEN
SHOT AND KILLED BY A MADISON
POLICE OFFICER ON MARCH 6.
ON WEDNESDAY, ROBINSON'S MOTHER
HAD THIS TO SAY:
>> I WANT TO BE ABLE TO MAKE A
CHANGE.
I DON'T WANT MY SON TO HAVE DIED
IN VAIN.
I WANT US TO BE ABLE TO MAKE
CHANGE AND DO IT PEACEFULLY.
>> Sreenivasan: A PRELIMINARY
REPORT RELEASED YESTERDAY
REVEALED ROBINSON HAD BEEN SHOT
IN THE HEAD, TORSO AND UPPER
BODY.
THE ROBINSON SHOOTING IGNITED
DAYS OF PROTESTS AND IS STILL
BEING INVESTIGATED BY STATE
AUTHORITIES.
AND IN FERGUSON, MISSOURI, THE
MANHUNT CONTINUES FOR THE
SUSPECTS WHO SHOT AND WOUNDED
TWO OFFICERS OUTSIDE THE POLICE
DEPARTMENT ON WEDNESDAY.
IT'S JUST THE LATEST INCIDENCE
OF VIOLENCE SINCE THE POLICE
SHOOTING OF MICHAEL BROWN ON
AUGUST 9.
THIS WEEK, FOLLOWING A SCATHING
JUSTICE DEPARTMENT REPORT ABOUT
RACISM WITHIN THE FERGUSON
POLICE DEPARTMENT, THE CITY'S
MANAGER, POLICE CHIEF AND
MUNICIPAL JUDGE ALL RESIGNED
THEIR POSITIONS WITHIN THE CITY.
BUT SO FAR, THE MAYOR OF
FERGUSON, JAMES KNOWLES, REFUSES
TO STEP DOWN.
KNOWLES SAYS HE WANTS TO "TURN
THE CITY AROUND," BUT HE ALSO
TOLD "USA TODAY": "I HAVE NO
EXECUTIVE AUTHORITY.
I HAVE NO ADMINISTRATIVE
AUTHORITY.
THE CHARTER DOESN'T ALLOW ME TO
HIRE, FIRE OR EVEN GIVE
DIRECTION TO CITY EMPLOYEES."
JOINING US NOW FROM ST. LOUIS IS
JIM SALTER OF THE ASSOCIATED
PRESS.
HE'S BEEN COVERING THE STORY
SINCE THE BEGINNING.
SO, LET'S BEGIN WITH THAT
STATEMENT.
IS THERE NO ONE THAT HAS ANY
LEADERSHIP CAPACITY IN FERGUSON,
IF THIS IS THE JOB DESCRIPTION
THAT THE MAYOR SAYS?
>> THERE'S AN ACTING CITY
MANAGER; THE ASSISTANT CITY
MANAGER HAS BEEN PROMOTED TO THE
POSITION NOW THAT JOHN SHAW
STEPPED DOWN.
THE MAYOR'S RIGHT.
HE'S... IN A SENSE, THE MAYOR,
CITY MANAGER, FORM OF GOVERNMENT
LIKE FERGUSON, IS A CEREMONIAL
FIGUREHEAD.
HE DOES RUN THE COUNCIL
MEETINGS, BUT IT'S A PART-TIME
POSITION; HE MAKES ABOUT $4,200
A YEAR.
AND UNTIL THIS WHOLE CRISIS
BROKE, HIS ROLE WAS REALLY TO
LEAD CITY COUNCIL MEETINGS AND
TO SHAKE HANDS AND TO BE SORT OF
THE FACE OF THE CITY.
>> Sreenivasan: SO, WHAT'S YOUR
SENSE, THEN, OF THE TENSION
BETWEEN DIFFERENT SIDES OVER
JUST THE PAST FEW MONTHS, AND
WHETHER IT'S GOTTEN WORSE WITH
WHAT HAPPENED JUST A FEW DAYS
AGO?
>> I BELIEVE IT'S GOTTEN BETTER
BECAUSE THE CITY HAS TAKEN
PRETTY SWIFT ACTION.
SIX DIFFERENT PRETTY KEY FIGURES
HAVE LEFT THE CITY, AS YOU
MENTIONED, IN THE PAST... REALLY
IN THE PAST WEEK, INCLUDING THE
CITY MANAGER, THE POLICE CHIEF,
THE MUNICIPAL COURT JUDGE AND
THE MUNICIPAL COURT CLERK, AND
TWO POLICE OFFICERS, THE OTHER
TWO.
THERE ARE STILL PEOPLE WHO
AREN'T SATISFIED.
THEY BELIEVE THAT THE MAYOR
SHOULD GO, THAT EVEN MEMBERS OF
THE COUNCIL SHOULD GO.
AND THE MAYOR'S ARGUMENT, OF
COURSE, IS THAT AS A PART-TIME
CEREMONIAL FIGURE, A CITY
COUNCIL LEADER, HE'S REALLY NOT
PRIVY TO THE INFORMATION THAT
THESE PEOPLE BELIEVE HE WAS
PRIVY TO.
>> Sreenivasan: SO, AT THE
MOMENT, WHEN IT COMES TO LAW
ENFORCEMENT, WHO'S IN CHARGE?
IS IT THE CITY POLICE?
IS IT THE STATE POLICE?
THE COUNTY POLICE?
>> WELL, IN TERMS OF DAY-TO-DAY
LAW ENFORCEMENT IN FERGUSON,
IT'S ABSOLUTELY THE CITY POLICE.
THERE ARE CERTAIN FACTIONS WHO
WANT THE POLICE DEPARTMENT TO BE
DISSOLVED.
THEY WANT ST. LOUIS COUNTY TO
TAKE OVER, OR A NEIGHBORING
COMMUNITY TO TAKE OVER PATROL IN
FERGUSON.
THE MAYOR HAS BEEN STEADFAST IN
THAT THE CITIZENS OF THE TOWN DO
NOT WANT THAT.
HE BELIEVES THAT THE CITIZENS
WANT THEIR OWN POLICE FORCE.
THEY WANT CHANGE, BUT THEY DON'T
WANT ANOTHER ENTITY TO COME IN
AND TAKE OVER.
NOW, IN TERMS OF SECURITY DURING
THE PROTEST, YES, THERE HAS BEEN
A CHANGE.
ST. LOUIS COUNTY AND THE
MISSOURI STATE HIGHWAY PATROL
HAVE TAKEN OVER THAT DUTY, AT
LEAST FOR NOW, ALTHOUGH THINGS
WERE VERY QUIET THE PAST TWO
NIGHTS.
IN FACT, VIRTUALLY NO PROTESTERS
LAST NIGHT.
SO, THAT COULD CHANGE.
BUT AS OF RIGHT NOW, FERGUSON IS
RUNNING ITS OWN POLICE
DEPARTMENT, BUT IT IS DEFERRING
TO ST. LOUIS COUNTY AND THE
HIGHWAY PATROL FOR PROTEST DUTY.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT, JAMES
SALTER OF THE ASSOCIATED PRESS,
JOINING US FROM ST. LOUIS.
THANKS SO MUCH.
>> MY PLEASURE.
>> Sreenivasan: THERE ARE NEW
DETAILS IN THE CONTROVERSY OVER
FORMER SECRETARY OF STATE
HILLARY CLINTON'S E-MAIL
PRACTICES.
THIS WEEK, CLINTON CONFIRMED SHE
USED A PRIVATE E-MAIL ACCOUNT
FOR OFFICIAL BUSINESS BUT
EMPHASIZED THE MESSAGES WERE
PRESERVED ON GOVERNMENT SERVERS.
BUT NOW, THE STATE DEPARTMENT IS
SAYING IT HAD NO WAY OF
ROUTINELY PRESERVING EMAILS FROM
SENIOR OFFICIALS DURING
CLINTON'S TIME WITH THE
DEPARTMENT.
IN FACT, OFFICIALS SAY THEY
DEPENDED ON INDIVIDUAL EMPLOYEES
TO DECIDE IF CERTAIN EMAILS
SHOULD BE CONSIDERED "PUBLIC
RECORDS."
CLINTON SAYS SHE HAS TURNED OVER
HER WORK-RELATED EMAILS TO STATE
DEPARTMENT OFFICIALS BUT SAYS
SHE WILL NOT TURN OVER PERSONAL
MESSAGES.
A NEW REPORT SHOWS THAT MILLIONS
OF DEATH RECORDS ARE MISSING
FROM THE SOCIAL SECURITY
DATABASE.
ACCORDING TO THE AGENCY'S
INSPECTOR GENERAL, SOCIAL
SECURITY RECORDS SHOW 6.5
MILLION PEOPLE IN THE U.S. HAVE
REACHED AGE 112 OR OLDER.
THE DATA LAPSE MEANS MILLIONS OF
LONG-DECEASED AMERICANS STILL
HAVE ACTIVE SOCIAL SECURITY
NUMBERS, SO THIEVES COULD USE
THEIR ACCOUNTS TO REPORT WAGES,
OPEN BANK ACCOUNTS, GET CREDIT
CARDS OR FAKE TAX PAPERS.
THE AGENCY SAYS IT IS WORKING TO
UPDATE THE SYSTEM BUT WARNS IT
WILL BE COSTLY AND TIME-
CONSUMING TO DO SO.
CALIFORNIA OFFICIALS SAY THEY
HAVE ISSUED ABOUT 131,000
DRIVER'S LICENSES TO
UNDOCUMENTED IMMIGRANTS IN THE
LAST TWO MONTHS.
CALIFORNIA IS ONE OF TEN STATES
AND THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
WHICH HAS DRAWN CRITICISM FOR
GRANTING DRIVER'S LICENSES
REGARDLESS OF IMMIGRATION
STATUS.
IN FRANCE, PROSECUTORS HAVE
INDICTED TWO MEN IN CONNECTION
WITH THE TERROR ATTACK ON A
KOSHER SUPERMARKET IN PARIS IN
JANUARY.
INVESTIGATORS SAY THEY HAVE TIED
A 25-YEAR-OLD AND A 33-YEAR-OLD
TO THE ATTACK ON THE MARKET AND
THE SATIRICAL MAGAZINE "CHARLIE
HEBDO" THROUGH HUNDREDS OF TEXT
MESSAGES, MEETINGS AND D.N.A.
FOUND AT THE CRIME SCENE.
ONE OF THE PACIFIC OCEAN'S MOST
POWERFUL STORMS HAS KILLED AT
LEAST EIGHT PEOPLE AND FORCED
HUNDREDS INTO SHELTERS ACROSS
THE VANUATU CHAIN OF ISLANDS.
PAM, A CATEGORY-FIVE CYCLONE,
HIT THE TINY SOUTH PACIFIC
NATION EARLY THIS MORNING,
PACKING WIND GUSTS UP TO 200
MILES PER HOUR.
UNICEF ESTIMATES 54,000 CHILDREN
HAVE BEEN AFFECTED BY THE
CYCLONE.
THE STORM IS EXPECTED TO SKIM
THE NORTHERN COAST OF NEW
ZEALAND TOMORROW INTO MONDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: THIS WEEK COULD
BE A TURNING POINT IN IRAQ'S
FIGHT AGAINST ISIS MILITANTS.
SHIA MILITIA MEMBERS HAVE JOINED
IRAQI FORCES TO TAKE BACK
TIKRIT.
IF THEY SUCCEED, IT WOULD BE THE
FIRST TIME PRO-GOVERNMENT FORCES
BEAT BACK ISIS TO RECOVER A
MAJOR IRAQI CITY.
YESTERDAY, THE FIGHTING
REPORTEDLY STALLED WHILE TROOPS
WAITED FOR REINFORCEMENTS.
BUT NOW, A U.S. MILITARY LEADER
SAYS HE'S WORRIED ABOUT WHAT
COULD HAPPEN NEXT IF IRAQI
TROOPS MANAGE TO DEFEAT ISIS
ALTOGETHER.
FOR SOME INSIGHT, WE'RE JOINED
NOW FROM WASHINGTON, D.C. BY
DOUGLAS OLLIVANT, FORMER
NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
DIRECTOR FOR IRAQ DURING THE
PRESIDENCIES OF GEORGE W. BUSH
AND BARACK OBAMA.
HE IS A SENIOR NATIONAL SECURITY
FELLOW AT THE NEW AMERICA
FOUNDATION AND A PARTNER AT
MANTID INTERNATIONAL.
SO, FIRST, WHY THE PAUSE IN
FIGHTING?
>> WELL, WE'RE NOT SURE.
THAT'S A SINGLE-SOURCE REPORT.
WE'RE NOT CONFIDENT THAT IS
WHAT'S HAPPENING, ALTHOUGH
KNOWING WHAT'S GOING ON IN THE
FOG OF BATTLE IS OFTEN
DIFFICULT.
WHAT WE DO KNOW IS THAT THE
BATTLE HAS BEEN GOING FAIRLY
SUCCESSFULLY.
IT'S POSSIBLE THAT THEY'VE TAKEN
A PAUSE TO CALL FOR MORE
REINFORCEMENTS.
BUT, IN GENERAL, THEY'VE BEEN
PUSHING THROUGH THE CITY OF
TIKRIT, AND WE DO EXPECT THEM TO
CONTROL IT IN DAYS TO, YOU KNOW,
A WEEK OR TEN DAYS AT THE
OUTSIDE.
>> Sreenivasan: YOU KNOW, I
REFERENCED A COMMENT FROM ARMY
GENERAL MARTIN DEMPSEY.
HE SAID THIS WEEK THAT ANY FIGHT
AGAINST ISIS IS A POSITIVE
THING, BUT HE WORRIED:
"WHAT HAPPENS AFTER THE DRUMS
STOP BEATING AND ISIL IS
DEFEATED, AND WHETHER THE
GOVERNMENT OF IRAQ WILL REMAIN
ON A PATH TO PROVIDE AN
INCLUSIVE GOVERNMENT FOR ALL OF
THE VARIOUS GROUPS WITHIN IT."
>> THAT'S A LEGITIMATE CONCERN.
THE GOOD NEWS TODAY IS THAT THE
INITIAL INDICATIONS ARE GOOD.
WE HAVE A FRONT PAGE STORY IN
THE "WALL STREET JOURNAL" TODAY
ABOUT THE SUNNI RESIDENTS AROUND
TIKRIT BEING OVERJOYED AT BEING
LIBERATED BY THE SHI'A MILITIAS.
IN FACT, WE HAVE A REPORT FROM
A.F.P. THAT STATES THAT SOME OF
THE SHI'A MILITIAS ARE SETTING
UP SUNNI GROUPS WITHIN THEM,
THAT THEY ARE RECRUITING, LIKE,
SUNNI AUXILIARIES TO THEIR
MILITIAS.
SO, THERE ARE SOME INITIAL GOOD
SIGNS.
NOW, OF COURSE, IN THE LONGER
TERM, THE POLITICAL
RECONCILIATION, THE
RECONSTRUCTION OF TIKRIT,
GETTING THE SERVICES BACK UP,
THE ECONOMY MOVING AGAIN-- THESE
ARE ALL REALLY IMPORTANT THINGS
THAT IT'S TOO EARLY TO TELL IF
THOSE ARE GOING TO BE AS
SUCCESSFUL.
>> Sreenivasan: AND THERE'S ALSO
SOME CONCERN, IT SEEMS, ON THE
INVOLVEMENT OF IRAN IN THIS
FIGHT.
THERE WAS A REPORT THAT AN
IRANIAN REVOLUTIONARY GUARD
COMMANDER WAS SEEN ON THE
BATTLEFIELD OR LEADING SOME OF
THE TROOPS IN TIKRIT.
AND THERE WAS SOME RESPONSE,
ALSO, FROM THE SAUDI FOREIGN
MINISTERS SAYING, "YOU KNOW,
WHAT?
THIS IS PROOF THAT IRAN IS
ESSENTIALLY TAKING OVER IRAQ."
I MEAN, IS IT VERY EASY TO GET
PEOPLE OFF THE BATTLEFIELD AND
SAY, "THANKS FOR THE HELP,
BACK TO YOUR COUNTRY NOW"?
>> WELL, CERTAINLY, IRAN IS
BANKING SOME VERY SERIOUS
POLITICAL CAPITAL WITH THE
IRAQIS IN THEIR INSTANTANEOUS
AND OVERWHELMING SUPPORT IN
THEIR FIGHT AGAINST THE ISLAMIC
STATE.
SO, IRAN, IN EFFECT, HAS PAID
ITS DUES AND WILL PROBABLY ENJOY
SOME POLITICAL SUPPORT IN THE
COMING YEARS BECAUSE OF THAT.
THAT'S SOMETHING THAT THE UNITED
STATES IS JUST GOING TO HAVE TO
KEEP COMPETING WITH IRAN FOR
INFLUENCE IN IRAQ.
IT WOULD BE EASY TO JUST WALK
AWAY, BUT, INSTEAD, WE NEED TO
STAY IN AND REALLY TRY TO
RECOVER FROM SOME MISTAKES, I
THINK, THAT WERE MADE EARLY ON
THAT HAVE GIVEN THE IRANIANS
SOME POSITIONAL ADVANTAGE IN THE
AFTERMATH OF WHAT WILL HAPPEN.
>> Sreenivasan: IS THAT WHAT'S
LEADING TO SOME OF THE TENSION
IN D.C. RIGHT NOW?
>> I THINK THAT'S A BIG PIECE OF
IT.
I MEAN, THERE ARE, OBVIOUSLY,
ALL TYPES OF THINGS GOING ON
WITH IRAN.
THIS IS JUST ONE PIECE OF IT.
THE NUCLEAR NEGOTIATIONS ARE IN
THE AIR.
THE COMPETITION WITH SAUDI
ARABIA IS IN THE AIR.
THERE'S A HUGE PROPAGANDA BATTLE
GOING ON, ON THE AIRWAVES, IN
SOCIAL MEDIA, YOU KNOW, FOR THE
ATTENTION OF THE PEOPLE, YOU
KNOW.
LOTS OF ACCUSATIONS THAT
IRANIAN-BACKED GROUPS ARE DOING
THIS.
THEY, OF COURSE, ARE PUSHING
BACK, SAYING THAT'S JUST NOT THE
CASE.
SO, YES, THERE ARE CONCERNS--
SOME OF THEM LEGITIMATE, SOME OF
THEM LESS SO-- AND WE'RE JUST
GOING TO SEE HOW THIS WORKS OUT
IN THE LONGER TERM.
BUT THERE DOESN'T SEEM TO BE ANY
ALTERNATIVE TO LETTING THE
IRANIANS HELP.
WE CERTAINLY DON'T WANT TO TELL
THE IRAQIS, KICK THEM OUT OF
COUNTRY AND FIGHT THE ISLAMIC
STATE WITHOUT THIS AID.
THAT'S NOT GOING TO FLY, EITHER.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT, DOUG
OLLIVANT JOINING US FROM
WASHINGTON, D.C.
THANKS SO MUCH.
>> ALWAYS A PLEASURE.
>> Sreenivasan: THIS WEEK, MANY
PUBLIC TELEVISION STATIONS
ACROSS THE COUNTRY ARE ONCE
AGAIN TAKING TIME OUT TO ASK FOR
YOUR SUPPORT.
WITH THAT IN MIND, WE ARE TAKING
TIME TO UPDATE YOU ON SOME OF
OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENTS.
IN THIS STORY THAT WAS
ORIGINALLY BROADCAST LAST JULY,
WE ASK WHAT HAPPENS TO ALL OF
YOUR ONLINE BANKING, TRAVEL AND
EMAIL ACCOUNTS AFTER YOU DIE?
AS IT TURNS OUT, MANAGING ONE'S
"DIGITAL ESTATE" IS A
COMPLICATED JOB.
DO YOU HAVE AN EMAIL ACCOUNT?
HOW ABOUT A FACEBOOK PAGE?
DO YOU BANK ONLINE?
SHOP ONLINE?
PAY YOUR GAS, LIGHT OR CABLE TV
BILL OVER THE INTERNET?
I'VE JUST LAID OUT MORE THAN A
HALF DOZEN ACCOUNTS THAT MANY OF
US HAVE, LIKELY EACH WITH ITS
OWN PASSWORD.
THESE ACCOUNTS DON'T DIE WITH
US.
THE PASSWORDS TO EACH OF THEM
ARE OFTEN TIMES LOCKED AWAY WITH
ONLY ONE PERSON, THE DECEASED.
WHICH MEANS THAT VALUABLE ONLINE
ASSETS COULD BE LOST FOREVER OR
BE FOUND BY THOSE LOOKING TO
EXPLOIT THEM.
TAKE THE CASE OF GLENN
WILLIAMSON, A TECH ENTREPRENEUR
IN PORTLAND, OREGON.
IN AUGUST OF 2012, HE GOT THE
WORST NEWS POSSIBLE.
>> I WAS IN THE PHILIPPINES
SPEAKING AT A CONFERENCE, AND,
YOU KNOW, WHEN YOUR PHONE GOES
OFF 15 TIMES AND IT'S 3:00 IN
THE MORNING IN THE UNITED
STATES, YOU HAVE A BAD FEELING.
YOU KNOW IT'S NOT A GOOD CALL.
>> Sreenivasan: GLENN'S 73-YEAR-
OLD MOTHER, LEE, HAD DIED.
AS HER FIDUCIARY AND AS A 25-
YEAR VETERAN OF THE TECH WORLD,
IT FELL TO HIM TO MANAGE HER
ONLINE ACCOUNTS.
>> I KNEW MY MOM, BEING A COOL
GRANDMA, WAS ON TWITTER.
SO, I KNEW SHE WAS ON TWITTER
AND I KNEW SHE HAD A YAHOO
ACCOUNT.
SO, WE HAD A BASELINE TO START,
BUT THAT'S ALL WE KNEW.
>> Sreenivasan: AFTER 20 HOURS
OF SEARCHING, GLENN FOUND 13
DIFFERENT ACCOUNTS BELONGING TO
HIS MOTHER, INCLUDING EMAIL,
SOCIAL MEDIA AND SHOPPING
ACCOUNTS.
>> SO, WE BROKE IT DOWN INTO
CATEGORIES-- TRAVEL, SENTIMENTAL
VALUE, SECURITY-- AND BASICALLY
WE SEARCHED ON ABOUT 75
DIFFERENT SITES.
>> Sreenivasan: SOME HAD REAL
VALUE.
AFTER GOING THROUGH ALL THE
AIRLINES WE GOT TO UNITED, AND
UNITED, DID, INDEED HAVE MY MOM
AS A CUSTOMER.
AND THERE WAS 54,000 MILES THAT
WE WERE ABLE TO RETRIEVE FOR OUR
FAMILY.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL THIS WHILE
HE WAS GRIEVING.
>> AND IT'S A PAINFUL... IT'S A
LONG PROCESS.
AND EVERYBODY MEANS WELL, BUT IF
ONE MORE PERSON TELLS YOU
THEY'RE SORRY, IT'S LIKE, OKAY,
I JUST NEED TO KNOW, DID SHE
HAVE AN ACCOUNT OR NOT?
>> Sreenivasan: WILLIAMSON AND
HIS WIFE ARE ONLINE SAVVY,
RELATIVELY YOUNG, AND IT WAS
STILL TOUGH TO FIND ALL THOSE
ACCOUNTS.
>> SO, THE AVERAGE PERSON,
ESPECIALLY IF THE AVERAGE PERSON
IS DOING IT IN THEIR 60s, IT'S A
VERY, VERY DIFFICULT PROCESS.
>> Sreenivasan: GLENN'S PROBLEMS
MANAGING HIS MOTHER'S ONLINE
ESTATE HELPED INSPIRE HIM TO
START A BUSINESS SOLUTION CALLED
WEBCEASE, AN ONLINE SERVICE THAT
HELPS PEOPLE SEARCH FOR THEIR
DECEASED LOVED ONES' DIGITAL
ASSETS.
IT USES A PERSON'S BASIC
INFORMATION, LIKE AN EMAIL
ADDRESS, AND FINDS THE MAJOR
ONLINE ACCOUNTS THAT ARE LINKED
TO IT.
AND ALTHOUGH WEBCEASE WON'T SHUT
DOWN AN ACCOUNT FOR YOU, IT WILL
TELL YOU WHAT CAN BE DONE UNDER
A WEB SITE'S SPECIFIC TERMS-OF-
SERVICE.
>> MY MOM HAD AN ASSET INVENTORY
OF HER FINANCIAL ACCOUNTS, BUT
SHE DIDN'T HAVE AN ASSET
INVENTORY OF ALL THINGS DIGITAL.
AND THAT'S REALLY WHAT WE
PROVIDE TO THE FAMILY IS, WE
PROVIDE THEM AT A HIGH LEVEL A
DIGITAL ASSET INVENTORY.
SO, YOU CAN LOOK THROUGH IT AND
SAY, "OH, MY MOM WAS ON AMAZON
AND iTUNES, AND SHE HAD MARRIOTT
AND HYATT, ET CETERA."
SO, THAT'S REALLY THE VALUE WE
PROVIDE.
>> Sreenivasan: WEBCEASE IS ONE
OF A HANDFUL OF WEB SITES THAT
HAS SPRUNG UP OVER THE LAST FEW
YEARS.
SITES LIKE NAVIGATR, THE DOC
SAFE, CAPSOOLE, MY CYBER SAFE,
AND AFTERNOTE-- ALL OF THEM
TRYING TO TACKLE WHAT IS
BECOMING AN INCREASINGLY COMMON
PROBLEM.
>> NOWADAYS, EVERYONE KEEPS
THEIR FILING CABINETS ON THEIR
COMPUTERS, AND THEY MAY NOT HAVE
SHARED THE ACCESS TO THAT WITH
THEIR FAMILIES.
>> Sreenivasan: SUZANNE WALSH IS
AN ESTATE LAWYER IN HARTFORD,
CONNECTICUT.
>> I HAVE RECEIVED PANICKED
CALLS FROM FAMILY MEMBERS WHO
DON'T KNOW PASSWORDS, DON'T KNOW
THE NATURE OF THE ONLINE
ACCOUNTS.
THEY SIMPLY KNOW MOM PAID THE
BILLS ONLINE, AND THEY MAY NOT
EVEN BE SURE ABOUT THE BANK.
>> Sreenivasan: WALSH SAYS THAT
THE MAIN PROBLEM IS ONE OF
ACCESS.
IN MANY CASES, WE HAVE MADE IT
VIRTUALLY ILLEGAL FOR ANYONE
ELSE TO USE OUR ONLINE ACCOUNTS.
IT STARTS WITH THOSE TERMS OF
SERVICE AGREEMENTS, THE FINE
PRINT OF THE ONLINE WORLD.
ONCE THE "I AGREE" BUTTON IS
PRESSED, IT'S AS GOOD AS A
CONTRACT.
>> MANY OF THEM PROHIBIT THE
SHARING OF PASSWORDS, AND THEY
PROHIBIT THIRD-PARTY ACCESS.
SO, RIGHT NOW, THEY TEND TO BAR
ANYBODY BUT THE ACCOUNT HOLDER
ACCESSING THE ACCOUNT.
>> Sreenivasan: THAT MEANS EVEN
IF THE ACCOUNT HOLDER IS DEAD.
INTERNET SERVICE PROVIDERS SAY
THEY'RE FOLLOWING THE LETTER OF
THE LAW AS SPELLED OUT IN THE
1986 STORED COMMUNICATIONS ACT,
WHICH PROHIBITS ANYONE FROM
ACCESSING PRIVATE INFORMATION
ONLINE WITHOUT PERMISSION.
>> THE PROBLEM WITH FIDUCIARY
ACCESS NOW IS THAT IT MAY BE A
VIOLATION OF FEDERAL PRIVACY LAW
OR A COMPUTER FRAUD AND ABUSE
ACT.
IT MAY BE AN ACTUAL CRIMINAL ACT
TO VIOLATE THE TERMS OF SERVICE
AGREEMENT.
>> Sreenivasan: BUT BEING UNABLE
TO ACCESS OR SHUT DOWN A
DECEASED LOVED ONE'S ACCOUNTS
COULD HAVE UNFORESEEN RISKS, AS
GLENN WILLIAMSON, WHO SPENT 20
YEARS IN ONLINE SECURITY, WILL
TELL YOU.
>> THE YEAR AFTER SOMEBODY
PASSES IS ONE OF THE MOST
VULNERABLE TIMES FOR IDENTITY
THEFT.
IT'S A HEINOUS CRIME, BUT WHAT
THE BAD GUYS DO, BECAUSE DEATH
IS PUBLIC RECORD, THEY'LL GO OUT
THERE AND THEY'LL COMB FOR
RECENTLY DECEASED AND THEY'LL
CREATE A FAKE IDENTITY.
BECAUSE THE DECEASED DON'T CHECK
EMAILS, AND THEY DON'T GET THE
MAIL.
>> Sreenivasan: EVERY YEAR, MORE
THAN TWO MILLION AMERICANS ARE
THE POSTHUMOUS VICTIMS OF
IDENTITY FRAUD.
THIEVES CAN USE A DEAD PERSON'S
INFORMATION TO RACK UP CREDIT
CARD CHARGES, APPLY FOR LOANS OR
EVEN FILE FALSE TAX RETURNS.
AND MUCH OF THIS INFORMATION CAN
BE FOUND ON THE INTERNET THROUGH
SOMETHING AS SIMPLE AS A
SHOPPING ACCOUNT.
TO DATE, ONLY NINE STATES HAVE
ANY LAWS IN EFFECT THAT GOVERN
ONLINE ESTATE PLANNING.
SUZANNE WALSH, WHO CHAIRS A
COMMITTEE ON THE UNIFORM LAW
COMMISSION, AN ORGANIZATION
WHICH DRAFTS LAWS IT HOPES TO
STANDARDIZE IN ALL 50 STATES, IS
TRYING TO CHANGE THAT.
LAST YEAR, WALSH'S COMMITTEE
FINISHED DRAFTING A BILL CALLED
THE "FIDUCIARY ACCESS TO DIGITAL
ASSETS ACT," WHICH WOULD GIVE
FIDUCIARIES THE SAME RIGHTS OVER
ONLINE ESTATES AS THEY NOW HAVE
OVER PHYSICAL ESTATES.
>> FIDUCIARIES, TRADITIONALLY,
HAVE ACCESS TO EVERYTHING IN
ADMIN... ESPECIALLY IN
ADMINISTERING ESTATES.
AND THAT USED TO MEAN OPENING UP
THE MAILBOX, OPENING UP THE FILE
CABINET, RIFLING THROUGH THE
DESK.
OUR ACT IS DESIGNED TO CONTINUE
THAT AND FACILITATE THAT, GIVEN
THE DIFFERENT NATURE OF THE
DIGITAL ASSETS.
>> Sreenivasan: THE BILL WAS
REVIEWED AND ENACTED BY THE
UNIFORM LAW COMMISSION LAST
JULY, BUT IT'S STILL UP TO
INDIVIDUAL STATE LEGISLATURES TO
PROPOSE IT AND PASS IT AS LAW.
ALTHOUGH THE ACT HAS BEEN
INTRODUCED IN 18 STATES, SO FAR,
ONLY ONE STATE, DELAWARE, HAS
SIGNED THE ACT INTO LAW.
HOWEVER, THE ACT IS NOT WITHOUT
ITS CRITICS.
THE GENERAL COUNSEL OF A
WASHINGTON, D.C.-BASED GROUP
CALLED THE STATE PRIVACY AND
SECURITY COALITION, WHICH
REPRESENTS THE INTERESTS OF
GOOGLE, YAHOO AND FACEBOOK,
AMONG OTHERS, CAME OUT AGAINST
DELAWARE'S NEW LAW, SAYING,
"THIS LAW TAKES NO ACCOUNT OF
MINIMIZING INTRUSIONS INTO THE
PRIVACY OF THIRD PARTIES WHO
COMMUNICATED WITH THE DECEASED.
THIS WOULD INCLUDE HIGHLY
CONFIDENTIAL COMMUNICATIONS TO
DECEDENTS FROM THIRD PARTIES WHO
ARE STILL ALIVE, WHO WOULD BE
VERY SURPRISED THAT AN EXECUTOR
IS REVIEWING THE
COMMUNICATIONS."
BUT, DESPITE THE PUSHBACK,
SUZANNE WALSH IS HOPEFUL THAT
HER COMMITTEE'S WORK WILL BE
RECOGNIZED IN MORE STATE
LEGISLATURES.
>> WIDESPREAD ENACTMENT IS OUR
GOAL.
THAT'S OUR PRIMARY GOAL.
CERTAINLY, WE HOPE AND EXPECT
THAT IT WON'T TAKE MORE THAN A
YEAR OR TWO FOR MOST OF THE
STATES TO ADOPT THIS PRODUCT.
>> Sreenivasan: WHILE THE STATES
DEBATE THE ACT, SOME INTERNET
SERVICE PROVIDERS HAVE BEGUN
PROPOSING THEIR OWN SOLUTIONS TO
THE PROBLEMS RAISED BY DIGITAL
ESTATES.
IN 2013, GOOGLE INTRODUCED A NEW
FEATURE CALLED "INACTIVE ACCOUNT
MANAGER," WHICH WOULD GIVE USERS
THE CHOICE OF HAVING THEIR
ACCOUNTS TRANSFERRED TO SPECIFIC
PEOPLE AFTER A SET PERIOD OF
INACTIVITY OR HAVING THEM
AUTOMATICALLY DELETED.
AND LAST MONTH, FACEBOOK
ANNOUNCED THEIR OWN FEATURE FOR
DEALING WITH DIGITAL ESTATE
MANAGEMENT CALLED "LEGACY
CONTACTS."
USERS CAN NOW CHOOSE A FACEBOOK
FRIEND TO MAINTAIN THEIR ACCOUNT
AFTER THEY DIE, BUT THE
DESIGNATED FRIEND CANNOT DELETE
THE ACCOUNT OR RESPOND TO
MESSAGES INTENDED FOR THE
DECEASED.
FACEBOOK USERS ALSO HAVE THE
OPTION TO HAVE THEIR ACCOUNT
DELETED UPON THEIR DEATH.
BUT BEYOND NEW USER FEATURES AND
STATE LAWS, THERE ARE STEPS THAT
PEOPLE CAN TAKE NOW TO MAKE THE
PROCESS OF DIGITAL ESTATE
MANAGEMENT EASIER ON NEXT OF
KIN.
FIRST, CREATE AN INVENTORY LIST
OF ALL YOUR ONLINE ACCOUNTS AND
PASSWORDS FOR YOUR FIDUCIARY.
STIPULATE WHAT TO DO WITH YOUR
EMAIL ACCOUNTS IN A WILL, AND
READ THE TERMS-OF-SERVICE
AGREEMENTS SO YOU CAN UNDERSTAND
HOW OR EVEN IF ACCESS TO YOUR
ACCOUNTS CAN BE GRANTED TO
SOMEONE ELSE.
BUT GLENN WILLIAMSON SAYS, NO
MATTER WHAT STEPS YOU TAKE OR
WHAT LAWS ARE EVENTUALLY PASSED,
MANAGING A DIGITAL ESTATE FOR A
LOVED ONE WILL ALWAYS BE A LONG,
ARDUOUS AND PAINFUL PROCESS.
LEARN HOW TO MANAGE YOUR DIGITAL
ESTATE AND KEEP YOUR ACCOUNTS
PROTECTED.
READ OUR GUIDE AT
www.pbs.org/newshour.
BEFORE WE LEAVE YOU, AN AMERICAN
AID WORKER WHO TESTED POSITIVE
FOR EBOLA IN SIERRA LEONE IS
BACK IN THE U.S. TONIGHT, BEING
TREATED AT THE NATIONAL
INSTITUTES OF HEALTH IN
BETHESDA, MARYLAND.
DOCTORS HAVE NOT RELEASED HIS
NAME BUT SAY HIS CONDITION IS
SERIOUS.
TEN OTHER U.S. AID WORKERS MIGHT
ALSO HAVE BEEN EXPOSED AND ARE
HEADED BACK TO THE U.S., AS
WELL.
NONE HAVE YET TESTED POSITIVE.
MORE THAN 10,000 PEOPLE HAVE
DIED OF EBOLA IN THE PAST YEAR.
AND IF YOU'RE A NERD LIKE ME,
YOU KNOW THERE ARE TWO FUN MATH
MOMENTS TODAY, A VERY SPECIAL
EDITION OF THE ANNUAL PI DAY.
AT 9:56 AND 53 SECONDS ON MARCH
14 OF 2015 IS ALSO THE FIRST
NINE DIGITS OF THE MATHEMATICAL
CONSTANT PI, ALL IN A ROW.
THE DATES AND TIME WON'T LINE UP
LIKE THIS FOR ANOTHER 100 YEARS.
AND FINALLY, THE DOCUMENTARY
"180 DAYS: HARTSVILLE" PREMIERES
THIS TUESDAY, MARCH 17, ON PBS.
IT EXAMINES THE NATION'S POVERTY
AND EDUCATION CHALLENGES BY
FOCUSING ON THE TRANSFORMATIVE
EFFORTS OF ONE SCHOOL DISTRICT
IN HARTSVILLE, SOUTH CAROLINA,
WHERE MOST RESIDENTS HOVER NEAR
THE POVERTY LINE.
HERE'S A BRIEF LOOK.
>> THE AMERICAN EDUCATION SYSTEM
IS BROKEN.
IT'S FAILING.
IS THAT REALLY TRUE?
>> FOR ALL THE CRITICISMS THAT
WE GET, WE REALLY DON'T GET UP
IN THE MORNING AND DRIVE TO WORK
THINKING ABOUT HOW BADLY WE CAN
DO TODAY.
>> THERE ARE GOOD DAYS HERE.
THERE ARE BAD DAYS HERE.
YOU KNOW, IT'S A JOURNEY.
>> Sreenivasan: THAT'S IT FOR
THIS EDITION OF PBS NEWSHOUR
WEEKEND.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
THANKS FOR WATCHING.